Add tutorial on creating and distributing a package (#2780)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: Tutorials/Creating-and-distributing-a-package/index.md

# Creating and distributing a package

This tutorial will take you through creating a brand new package in Umbraco, distributing it on the [package repository on Our Umbraco](https://our.umbraco.com/packages/), and finally automating the update flow and including it in CI/CD.

## Overview

- Prerequisites
- Creating a test site locally
- Creating a package from the backoffice
- Creating a draft package on Our
- Pushing your package to Github
- Pack up your package locally using UmbPack 
- Pushing your package to Our using UmbPack
- Deploy your package using Github Actions

> - Archive older versions on push

Author: Added in https://github.com/umbraco/UmbracoDocs/pull/2780/commits/00b9a6bbdabe9c850651af3b1766ff9a94c3ee55

## Prerequisites

To run this tutorial you will need the following:

- Be able to run an Umbraco site locally
- Git + Github account
- Our member account with access to upload packages

> - Umbpack installed

Reviewer: I wasn't sure whether this should always be UmbPack as you've used in some places or here where you have Umbpack ?

Author: ```suggestion
- UmbPack installed
```
Understandable.. Naming is hard, and this name is complicated sometimes 😀 Let's make it conform to the other instances for now.

~/App_Plugins/PackageWorkshop/ContentApp/main.css

Both would have the same name and be thrown in the root of the zip file - this would cause a conflict and Umbraco would rename them to randomly generated names. These names would correspond to the `guid` property, while the `orgName` and `orgPath` would make up the original names - and would be where the package would place and name the file when being intalled.

## Creating a draft package on Our

At this point we have a complete package and can push it to [Our Umbraco](https://our.umbraco.com/packages/) which is the where the Umbraco package repository is. The packages on that website are also the ones that are featured in the package section of the backoffice.

To create a package on Our, you first need an account on there and the account needs to have a certain level of karma - which can be gained by responding to forum posts.

Once you log in you can go to your [package overview][member-package-overview] which should look a bit like this:

![Package overview][package-overview]

Click the "Add package" button and fill out all the information, upload the package and save in the end.

:::warning 

> If you don't intend for people to use the package (as in this tutorial), then please don't click the "Go live" button in the end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't intend for people to use the package (as in this tutorial), then please don't click the "Go live" button at the final step!
```

:::

Now your package is on Our, and if the "Go live" button is clicked it is visible for all to see! Next step is to make it a bit simpler to deploy updates to the package. It is perfectly fine to log in here, and upload a new version each time. The next steps will show an easier way though..

## Pushing your package to Github

If you are creating a package in order to share it with others it is a great idea to also share the source code. It is the open source way!

To share it, and make it easier to manage and deploy updates we will set up a Github repository for the package. This tutorial assumes you know what Github is, and that you have an account. 

> Create a fresh repo, with no readme, gitignore nor based on a template. On the second screen it will give you a command to push an existing repository to the new Github repo, should look like this but with your own user in the link:

Reviewer: wasn't sure what the nor text meant here..?

Reviewer: ahh I understand... how about

Create a fresh repo, with no readme or gitignore - do not choose a repository template (set to 'No Template').

```
git remote add origin https://github.com/jmayntzhusen/package-workshop.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

If you jump back to your command line in the folder that has the .sln file and the gitignore, you may notice that there is no git repo by default, so let's create one:

```
git init
git checkout -b main
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit, dashboard package"
```

At this point you have your solution in a local git repository, and we can then use the command from Github to push it up:

```
git remote add origin https://github.com/jmayntzhusen/package-workshop.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

Now you have it all on Github:

![Github repo][github-repo]

## Pack up your package locally using UmbPack 

At this point you know how to create a package from the backoffice, upload it to Our and push your changes to Github. That's what it takes to create and maintain a package. 

> If you want to make changes and push a new version you can do these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to make changes and push a new version you can carry out the following steps:
```

- Create the new package in the backoffice
- Sync your code to Github
- Go to Our and upload a new zip version
- Set that to the current version
- Optionally archive the previous one

> However, while working this way is definitely possible, and will work for everyone it is pretty time consuming and requires you to do a lot of things in different places. So let's make it a bit easier!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, whilst working this way is definitely possible, and will work for everyone it is pretty time consuming and requires you to do a lot of things in different places. So let's make it a bit easier!
```

Instead of going to the Backoffice and creating or updating your package from the package section each time, you can use the UmbPack tool to make smaller changes.

:::note 
Any changes to Umbraco content and schema is a lot easier to do from the backoffice, but if it is file-based UmbPack is quicker.
:::

> If you have a look back in your your solution you will notice there is an almost empty package.xml file in the root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a look back in your solution you will notice there is an almost empty package.xml file in the root:
```

![Package.xml file in root][packagexml]

If you open this package.xml file you will notice it has some default values in it, the only new part is under files:

```xml
  <files>
    <folder path="src/Package.Workshop/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop" orgPath="App_Plugins/Package.Workshop" />
    <file path="src/Package.Workshop/bin/release/Package.Workshop.dll" orgPath="bin/Package.Workshop.dll" />
  </files>
```

> Here you may notice that compared to your backoffice created package.xml it has not only a file elements, but also a folder element. The folder element is not part of the regular package schema, and something we've added in UmbPack which works with the `umbpack pack` command where it runs through the folder and adds each file within it in the final zip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you may notice that compared to your backoffice created package.xml it has not only a file element, but also a folder element. The folder element is not part of the regular package schema, and something we've added in UmbPack which works with the `umbpack pack` command where it runs through the folder and adds each file within it in the final zip.
```

> So the xml above will turn into this which is compatible with the Umbraco package installer, and is exactly like what you got in hen creating the package from the backoffice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the XML above will turn into this, which is compatible with the Umbraco package installer, and is exactly like the same as what you would have got if you had created the package from the backoffice:
```

```xml
<files>
  <file>
    <guid>Package.Workshop.dll</guid>
    <orgPath>/bin</orgPath>
    <orgName>Package.Workshop.dll</orgName>
  </file>
  <file>
    <guid>dashboard.html</guid>
    <orgPath>/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop/Dashboard</orgPath>
    <orgName>dashboard.html</orgName>
  </file>
  <file>
    <guid>dashboardController.js</guid>
    <orgPath>/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop/Dashboard</orgPath>
    <orgName>dashboardController.js</orgName>
  </file>
  <file>
    <guid>dashboardService.js</guid>
    <orgPath>/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop/Dashboard</orgPath>
    <orgName>dashboardService.js</orgName>
  </file>
  <file>
    <guid>package.manifest</guid>
    <orgPath>/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop/Dashboard</orgPath>
    <orgName>package.manifest</orgName>
  </file>
  <file>
    <guid>en.xml</guid>
    <orgPath>/App_Plugins/Package.Workshop/Dashboard/Lang</orgPath>
    <orgName>en.xml</orgName>
  </file>
</files>
```

Before we try it out using UmbPack, try to run this command in the root of your site:

> ```umbpack pack -h```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
umbpack pack -h
```
```

(I'm not sure why, but this breaks the layout for me, guess is backticks on one line?)

Author: Not sure what you are suggesting here either as it breaks.. Should I try to remove the backticks on their own lines?

Reviewer: yeah,  I think so, maybe it would be ok when published, but everything after this in the resto of the text to review seemed part of the 'code' example?

> The commandline tool will tell you all the options you have when packing up your package. You can find much more in-depth explanation of the options in the [UmbPack documentation][umbpack-pack].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commandline tool will tell you all the options you have when packing up your package. You can a find much more in-depth explanation of the options in the [UmbPack documentation][umbpack-pack].
```

> For now we don't need to worry about the output directory option, we will let UmbPack save it in the current folder. Likewise with the name and version override, we will let UmbPack use the name and version we specified in the package.xml file. For the package.xml path we will specify the one in the root we had a look at right before this, that points to both the dll file and the App_Plugins folder in the website project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now we don't need to worry about the output directory option, we will let UmbPack save it in the current folder. Likewise, with the name and version override, we will let UmbPack use the name and version we specified in the package.xml file. For the package.xml path we will specify the one in the root we used in the previous step, that points to both the dll file and the App_Plugins folder in the website project.
```

```umbpack pack .\package.xml```

And now we have a zipped version of our package with any new additions in App_Plugins automatically added and listed in the package.xml of the zip. Now you can make changes and run the above command to have an updated version of the package within seconds!

Next up - let's push this package update to Our from the commandline!

## Pushing your package to Our using UmbPack

To push a package update to Our with UmbPack we need to use the `push` command, so let's have a quick look at the options for that by running:

```umbpack push -h```

> You will see there are 2 nessecary options, an API key and a path to the package zip. Then it is also possible for you to specify the Umbraco versions and dotnet version the package is compatible with, and also to archive old packages and set this as the new current package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will see there are 2 necessary options, an API key and a path to the package zip. Then it is also possible for you to specify the Umbraco versions and dotnet version the package is compatible with, and also to archive old packages and set this as the new current package.
```

> In short - similar options to what you can set on the package upload section on Our when uploading a package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short - similar options to what you can set on the package upload section on Our when uploading a package manually:
```

![Our package data][our-pkg-data]

So before we can try this out, let's go to Our and create an API key!

### Creating an Our API key

> If you had back to Our Umbraco and visit the [package overview][member-package-overview], then you will notice that there is a button under your package that says "API Keys". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you head back to Our Umbraco and visit the [package overview][member-package-overview], then you will notice that there is a button under your package that says "API Keys". 
```

Each package api key is tied to that specific package, if you visit the page then you can create keys with a name you can use to differentiate the keys. Once you make a key it will show once, as soon as you refresh or navigate away the key will be gone and you'll have to make a new one if you lose it.

Once you created your key, make sure to copy and paste it somewhere. We will need to use it a few times in the coming steps, remember if you lose it you will have to make a new one!

### Pushing to Our with UmbPack

Now that we have an API key we can try to push our package update to Our Umbraco. This can be done like this:

```umbpack push .\PackageWorkshopDashboard_1.0.0.zip -k [Api key here]```

:::note 
If a package with the same name already exists it may give an error. In that case you can run `umbpack pack .\package.xml -v 1.0.1` to create a new version of the package then push it with the above command after editing the path to the new package.
:::

> An important thing to note with the push command here is that it sets some defalt values. If not specified otherwise it will default to saying your package is compatible with Umbraco v8.5.0, Dotnet 4.7.2 and it's to be set as the new "current" package on Our.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important thing to note with the push command here is that it sets some default values. If these values are not explicitly set it will default to saying your package is compatible with Umbraco v8.5.0, Dotnet 4.7.2 and it's to be set as the new "current" package on Our.
```

You can edit all of these defaults, and also specify older versions of your package to be archived when pushing new versions. You can read much more about the push options in the [Umbpack documentation][umbpack-push].

So at this point we can work on our package locally, build a new version within seconds by running the pack command and then deploy it to Our using the push command!

Not easy enough for you? Let's try automating this entire thing with Github actions then!

## Deploy your package using Github Actions

If you think back to the beginning when we set up our sites using the Package Templates you may remember that by default you get a Github action installed as well.

If you check out the `~/.github/workflows` folder in your solution, you will see there is a readme file and a build.yml file. 

> The build.yml file is used by Github actions, which will perform some tasks for you when certain criteria are met. If you never worked with continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD) before, then this may seem like magic - but don't worry we will run through the commands!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build.yml file is used by Github actions, which will perform some tasks for you when certain criteria are met. If you haven't worked with continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD) before, then this may seem like magic - but don't worry we will run through the commands!
```

> The build.yml file contains several things, let's do a quick overview:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build.yml file contains several things, let's have a quick overview:
```

Line 14-17:
```yml
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - "release/*"
```

This means that when you push a new tag called `release/*` it will run the action, and only in that case.

The action that it performs is what is under `jobs:build:steps`. There is a step that uses UmbPack to create the package using the `pack` command, like we did locally on our machines!

```yml
- name: Create Umbraco package file
  run: UmbPack pack ./package.xml -o ${{ env.OUTPUT }} -v ${{ steps.get_version.outputs.VERSION }}
```

:::note
It sets the version of the package to be what we've set in the release tag based on a previous step.
:::

> Below it there is another step to push the package to Our, which again is like what we did locally - except now we add the API key as a Github secret so it's not public to everyone!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below this there is another step to push the package to Our, which again is like our approach locally - except now we add the API key as a Github secret so it's not public to everyone!
```

![Github secret](images/gh-secret.png)

```yml
- name: Push to Our
  run: umbpack push -k ${{ secrets.UMBRACO_DEPLOY_KEY }} ${{ env.Output }}\PackageWorkshopDashboard_${{ steps.get_tag.outputs.VERSION }}.zip
```

> With these 2 commands and a few previous ones setting up the prerequisite build and nuget tools it is not ready to be fully automated!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these 2 commands and a few previous ones setting up the prerequisite build and nuget tools it is now ready to be fully automated!
```

Ensure you have set a Github secret with the name `UMBRACO_DEPLOY_KEY` and the value of the key from Our, and then go to your local solution and uncomment the UmbPack push command in the ~/.github/workflows/build.yml file.

Then make sure it is added and committed locally:

```
git add .
git commit -m "Enable umbpack push in GH action"
git push
```

Your solution and Github repo are now in sync, and the umbpack commands in the Github action are enabled and ready to run. Final step is to create a release tag and push it to Github:

```
git tag release/1.0.0
git push origin release/1.0.0
```

> At this point you can go to Github and visit the Action tab to see your Github action run. When it's done successfully you can go to your package overview on Our and see the package there!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point you can go to Github and visit the Action tab to see your Github action run. When it's completed successfully you can go to your package overview on Our and see the package there!
```

```
umbpack pack .\package.xml
```

And now we have a zipped version of our package with any new additions in App_Plugins automatically added and listed in the package.xml of the zip. Now you can make changes and run the above command to have an updated version of the package within seconds!

Next up - let's push this package update to Our from the commandline!

## Pushing your package to Our using UmbPack

To push a package update to Our with UmbPack we need to use the `push` command, so let's have a quick look at the options for that by running:

```
umbpack push -h
```

You will see there are 2 necessary options, an API key and a path to the package zip. Then it is also possible for you to specify the Umbraco versions and dotnet version the package is compatible with, and also to archive old packages and set this as the new current package.

In short - similar options to what you can set on the package upload section on Our when uploading a package manually:

![Our package data][our-pkg-data]

> So before we can try this out, let's go to Our and create an API key!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So before we can try this out, let's go to Our and create an API key.
```

### Creating an Our API key

If you head back to Our Umbraco and visit the [package overview][member-package-overview], then you will notice that there is a button under your package that says "API Keys". 
Each package api key is tied to that specific package, if you visit the page then you can create keys with a name you can use to differentiate the keys. Once you make a key it will show once, as soon as you refresh or navigate away the key will be gone and you'll have to make a new one if you lose it.

> Once you created your key, make sure to copy and paste it somewhere. We will need to use it a few times in the coming steps, remember if you lose it you will have to make a new one!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you created your key, make sure to copy and paste it somewhere. We will need to use it a few times in the coming steps, remember if you lose it you will have to make a new one.
```

### Pushing to Our with UmbPack

Now that we have an API key we can try to push our package update to Our Umbraco. This can be done like this:

```
umbpack push .\PackageWorkshopDashboard_1.0.0.zip -k [Api key here]
```

:::note 
If a package with the same name already exists it may give an error. In that case you can run `umbpack pack .\package.xml -v 1.0.1` to create a new version of the package then push it with the above command after editing the path to the new package.
:::

An important thing to note with the push command here is that it sets some default values. If these values are not explicitly set it will default to saying your package is compatible with Umbraco v8.5.0, Dotnet 4.7.2 and it's to be set as the new "current" package on Our.

You can edit all of these defaults, and also specify older versions of your package to be archived when pushing new versions. You can read much more about the push options in the [Umbpack documentation][umbpack-push].

> So at this point we can work on our package locally, build a new version within seconds by running the pack command and then deploy it to Our using the push command!
> 
> Not easy enough for you? Let's try automating this entire thing with Github actions then!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So at this point we can work on our package locally, build a new version within seconds by running the pack command and then deploy it to Our using the push command.

Not easy enough for you? Let's try automating this entire thing with Github actions then.
```

## Deploy your package using Github Actions

If you think back to the beginning when we set up our sites using the Package Templates you may remember that by default you get a Github action installed as well.

If you check out the `~/.github/workflows` folder in your solution, you will see there is a readme file and a build.yml file. 

> The build.yml file is used by Github actions, which will perform some tasks for you when certain criteria are met. If you haven't worked with continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD) before, then this may seem like magic - but don't worry we will run through the commands!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The build.yml file is used by Github actions, which will perform some tasks for you when certain criteria are met. If you haven't worked with continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD) before, then this may seem like magic - but don't worry we will run through the commands.
```

The build.yml file contains several things, let's have a quick overview:

Line 14-17:
```yml
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - "release/*"
```

This means that when you push a new tag called `release/*` it will run the action, and only in that case.

> The action that it performs is what is under `jobs:build:steps`. There is a step that uses UmbPack to create the package using the `pack` command, like we did locally on our machines!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The action that it performs is what is under `jobs:build:steps`. There is a step that uses UmbPack to create the package using the `pack` command like we did locally on our machines.
```

```yml
- name: Create Umbraco package file
  run: UmbPack pack ./package.xml -o ${{ env.OUTPUT }} -v ${{ steps.get_version.outputs.VERSION }}
```

:::note
It sets the version of the package to be what we've set in the release tag based on a previous step.
:::

> Below this there is another step to push the package to Our, which again is like our approach locally - except now we add the API key as a Github secret so it's not public to everyone!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below this there is another step to push the package to Our, which again is like our approach locally - except now we add the API key as a Github secret so it's not public to everyone.
```

![Github secret](images/gh-secret.png)

```yml
- name: Push to Our
  run: umbpack push -k ${{ secrets.UMBRACO_DEPLOY_KEY }} ${{ env.Output }}\PackageWorkshopDashboard_${{ steps.get_tag.outputs.VERSION }}.zip
```

> With these 2 commands and a few previous ones setting up the prerequisite build and nuget tools it is now ready to be fully automated!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these 2 commands and a few previous ones setting up the prerequisite build and nuget tools it is now ready to be fully automated.
```

Ensure you have set a Github secret with the name `UMBRACO_DEPLOY_KEY` and the value of the key from Our, and then go to your local solution and uncomment the UmbPack push command in the ~/.github/workflows/build.yml file.

Then make sure it is added and committed locally:

```
git add .
git commit -m "Enable umbpack push in GH action"
git push
```

Your solution and Github repo are now in sync, and the umbpack commands in the Github action are enabled and ready to run. Final step is to create a release tag and push it to Github:

```
git tag release/1.0.0
git push origin release/1.0.0
```

> At this point you can go to Github and visit the Action tab to see your Github action run. When it's completed successfully you can go to your package overview on Our and see the package there!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point you can go to Github and visit the Action tab to see your Github action run. When it's completed successfully you can go to your package overview on Our and see the package there.
```
